**Republicans Outperform the Polls, and Here's Why**It is the time of year again when we seek to bring clarity to our polling techniques that worked to predict who would be upon Capitol Hill for the next few years. With this in mind, many polls have tried their hand at gaining the best view of what the people want. In this deluge of margin of errors and variable victors, it can be difficult to synthesize who our expected winners will precisely be. I try to amass the results of these polls in a way that can teach us about inherent biases in these snapshots of our political zeitgeist. It is important that we acknowledge these inherent biases so we can see more accurately what the opinions of Americans really are. Let’s see what would happen if we tried to predict the results on November 2nd.As we know, of the 34 Senate seats voted on this past fall, 23 of them fell into the hands of Republicans, while only 11 went to the Democrats. To understand what the polls predicted, I gathered a set of many polls from across the country to see what they said state by state, and made some cursory predictions about what was being seen. By averaging the data across similar locations and weighting based on error margins, I obtain a cursory result that attempts to predict the outcome we saw. 
![firstplot]: (https://github.com/cs109-students/albergo08-2015hw/tree/hw2/images/firstplot.png)From this we see our cursory estimate fails by missing the votecount by 2 votes below what the republicans really won. Just taking the data as its given causes us to fall short of our intended understanding. What our estimate also fails to consider is context. It doesn’t tell us that about the trends in leadership, the implied shifting democrat to republican to democrat once more. So we find there to be a bias in our data, against the republicans. Maybe if we change this we can get a better sense of winners and losers.What is needed is a model that we use to predict how much of a population will vote for the democrat/republican based on a number of factors. We start with one that is dependent on incumbency (whether the candidate is already in office when running again), the democratic fraction that voted last time for the democrat/republican, and another on how these two factors affect each other. This model helps us nuance our polling data, so we are using more from the data pool we were given than just the first-layer information of who thinks they will vote for who (who knew not everyone matched the poll?). We get really good estimates of the value of our model by fitting the data to it many times, and we see what this tells us.

![plot2]:(https://github.com/cs109-students/albergo08-2015hw/tree/hw2/images/plot2.png)Ah! Not so far from the truth now, are we. Here we see the benefits from considering the context of our data. This data comes from people, so it’s going to have some human psychology in it as well. I’ll leave you to consider that more. Let’s see how this model helped mend the bias we were coming across against republicans. As mentioned earlier, it is important to consider how the effects of the party that was in office and individual that was in office affect each other. Let’s view how each party is favored by the model before and after its corrections.##### Before making correction![spreadplot_before]:https://github.com/cs109-students/albergo08-2015hw/tree/hw2/images/spreadplot_before.png##### After Making Correction![spreadplot_after]:(https://github.com/cs109-students/albergo08-2015hw/tree/hw2/images/spreadplot_after.png)Our green dots from our model move farther away from the actual democratic results, showing us that we aren’t considering that bias against republicans as much anymore. Unless we take steps to improve our interpretation of polling like this, they won’t tell us much. But if we do, they can tell us close to everything. 